each new setting of alberti's disk brought into play a new cipheralphabet, in which both the
plaintext and the ciphertext equivalents arechanged in regard to one another. there are as
many of these alphabetsas there are positions of his disk, and this multiplicity means that
albertihere devised the first polyalphabetic cipher.this achievement—critical in the
history of cryptology —alberti thenadorned by another remarkable invention: enciphered code.
it was forthis that he had put numbers in the outer ring. in a table he permutedthe numbers
1 to 4 in two-, three-, and four-digit groups, from 11 to4444, and used these as 336 codegroups
for a small code. "in this table,according to agreement, we shall enter in the various lines at
thenumbers whatever complete phrases we please, for example,corresponding to 12, 'we have made
ready the ships which we promisedand supplied them with troops and grain.' " these code values
did notchange, any more than the mixed alphabet of the disk did. but the digitsresulting
from an encoding were then enciphered with the disk just as ifthey were plaintext letters.
in alberti's words, "these numbers i theninsert in my message according to the formula of the
cipher, representingthem by the letters that denote these numbers." these numbers
thuschanged their ciphertext equivalents as the disk turned. hence 341,perhaps meaning
"pope," might become mrp at one position and fco atanother. this constitutes an excellent
form of enciphered code, and justhow precocious alberti was may be seen by the fact that the
majorpowers of the earth did not begin to encipher their code messages until400 years later,
near the end of the 19th century, and even then theirsystems were much simpler than
this.alberti's three remarkable firsts—the earliest western exposition ofcryptanalysis,
the invention of polyalphabetie substitution, and theinvention of enciphered code—make
him the father of westerncryptology. but although his treatise was published in italian in
acollection of his works in 1568, and although his ideas were absorbed bypapal cryptologists and
perhaps influenced the science's development,they never had the dynamic impact that such
prodigiousaccomplishments ought to have produced. symonds' evaluation of hiswork in general
may both explain why and summarize the modern view of his cryptological contributions:"this
man of many-sided genius came into the world too soon for theperfect exercise of his singular
faculties. whether we regard him from thepoint of view of art, of science, or of literature, he
occupies in eachdepartment the position of precursor, pioneer, and indicator. alwaysoriginal
and always fertile, he prophesied of lands he was not privilegedto enter, leaving the memory of
dim and varied greatness rather than anysolid monument behind him."polyalphabeticity took
another step forward in 1518, with theappearance of the first printed book on cryptology,
written by one of themost famous intellectuals of his day. this was johannes trithemius,
abenedictine monk whose dabbling in alchemy and other mystic powersmade him one of the most
revered figures in occult science, while hismore solid scholarship won him the title of
"father of bibiliography." in1518, a year and a half after his death, his polygraphiae libri sex,
loannistrithemii abbatis peapolitani, quondam spanheimensis, ad maximilianumcaesarem ("six
books of polygraphy, by johannes trithemius, abbot atwurzburg, formerly at spanheim, for the
emperor maximilian") waspublished. by far the bulk of the volume consists of the columns
ofwords printed in large gothic type that trithemius used in his systems ofcryptography.
but in the work's book v appears, for the first time, thesquare table, or tableau. this is the
elemental form of polyalphabeticsubstitution, for it exhibits all at once all the cipher
alphabets in aparticular system. these are usually all the same sequence of letters,
butshifted to different positions in relation to the plaintext alphabet, as inalberti's
disk the inner alphabet assumed different positions in regard tothe outer alphabet. the
tableau sets them out in orderly fashion—thealphabets of the successive positions laid
out in rows one below theother, each alphabet shifted one place to the left of the one above.
eachrow thus offers a different set of cipher substitutes to the letters of
theplaintext alphabet at the top. since there can be only as many rows asthere are letters in
the alphabet, the tableau is square.the simplest tableau is one that uses the normal
alphabet in variouspositions as the cipher alphabets. each cipher alphabet produces, inother
words, a caesar substitution.
